## Page 1

US00799831 3B2

(12) United States Patent                   (10) Patent No.:   US 7,998,313 B2
   Kokko                                                    (45) Date of Patent:      Aug. 16, 2011

(54)  INFLATED FIBERS OF REGENERATED                  4,129,679 A  *  12/1978  Woodings  ..................... 428,398
    CELLULOSE FORMED FROM ONC                     4,130,689 A *  12/1978  Costa, Jr.  .......              ... 428/398
                                                                         4,246,221 A      1/1981  McCorsley, III  ...         ... 264/203
    LIQUID/CELLULOSE DOPE AND RELATED             5,124,197 A *   6/1992  Bernardin et al.   .............. 442/35
    PRODUCTS                                                     5,607,551 A     3/1997  Farrington, Jr. et al.  ...... 162/109
                                                                       6,129,867 A *  10/2000  Chevalier et al.  ............... 264/28
(75)   Inventor:  Bruce J. Kokko, Neenah, WI (US)                 6,187,137 B1     2/2001  Druecke et al.  ....          ... 162/109
                                                                        6,235,150 B1     5/2001  Middleton et al.  ................ 162/9
(73)  Assignee:  Georgia-Pacific Consumer Products              6,573.405 B1    6/2003  Abbott et al.  ................. 564,292
               LP, Atlanta, GA (US)                               6,808,557 B2   10/2004  Holbrey et al                                 .       .       .        .       .       .        .       .       .  106,163.01
                                              s                 s                                         6,900,313 B2    5/2005  Wasserscheid et al.  ......... 544/59
                                                                                                                                                                                         -                                  7,053,232 B2     5/2006 Mouton   ........................ 556,174
(*)   Notice:    Subject to any disclaimer, the term of this      2003/O157351 A1     8/2003  Swatloski et al.    .      428,478.4
                 patent is extended or adjusted under 35      2004/0009205 A1*   1/2004 Sawhney   ...................... 424/423
                U.S.C. 154(b) by 88 days.                     2004/0038031 A1*   2/2004  Holbrey et al.                    ... 428/402.24
                                                                     2005, 0121157 A1    6/2005  Doelle et al.  ...................... 162/9
                                                                       2005, 0186247 A1*    8, 2005  Hunter et al.   ......                  ... 424/423
(21)  Appl. No.: 11/983,318                                   2005/0288484 A1   12/2005  Holbrey et al.                 ... 528,480
                                                               2006/0090271 A1*   5/2006  Price et al.  ........................ 8.490
(22)   Filed:     Nov. 8, 2007                                  2006/0113051 A1    6/2006  Dolle  .............        162,1812
                                                              2006/0207722 A1      9, 2006 Amano et al.    .              ... 156,327
(65)                Prior Publication Data                    2006/0240727 A1   10/2006  Price et al.  ...................... 442/59
                                                              2006/0240728 A1     10, 2006  Price et al.  ...................... 442/59
    US 2008/O1351.93 A1     Jun. 12, 2008                  2006/0241287 A1     10, 2006  Hecht et al.  ................... 530,356
             Related U.S. Application Data                      OTHER PUBLICATIONS
(60)  Provisional application No. 60/873,356, filed on Dec.        J. Amer. Chem. Soc. (2002) 124, article at 4974, Macromolecules
        7, 2006.                                                      (2005), 38, article at 8272; Macromol. Biosci. (2005), 5, article at
                                                                    520; and Biomacromolecules (2004), 5, article at 1379.
(51)   Int. Cl.                                                   * cited by examiner
     D2 IIH II/00          (2006.01)
(52)  U.S. Cl.  ............... 162/157.1: 162/157.6; 162/157.7;    Primary Examiner — Eric Hug
                  264/41; 264/43; 264/48; 264/50: 264/55     Assistant Examiner — Jacob Thomas Minskey
(58)   Field of Classification Search  ............... 162/157.1,     (74) Attorney, Agent, or Firm — Laura L. Bozek
                                         162/157.6, 157.7
      See application file for complete search history.           (57)           ABSTRACT
 56                Ref       Cited                           Inflated fibers of regenerated cellulose and other regenerated(56)            eerees    e                             structures are formed from ionic liquid/cellulose dope. Fibers
              U.S. PATENT DOCUMENTS                   so produced may be incorporated into absorbent sheet with
                                                              other papermaking fibers to provide softness, bulk and absor     3,156,605 A     11, 1964  Anderer et al.   ............... 161,169
     3,508,941 A       4, 1970  Johnson  ...........                      ...  106/125     bency.
     3,764,428 A *  10/1973  Oshima et al.  .......         ...  156,78
      3,994,771. A       1 1/1976  Morgan, Jr. et al.  .......... 162/113                 16 Claims, 5 Drawing Sheets
     4,102,737 A        7, 1978  Morton  ......................... 162,113              (5 of 5 Drawing Sheet(s) Filed in Color)



                                SE:  a

---

## Page 2

U.S. Patent      Aug. 16, 2011      Sheet 1 of 5        US 7,998,313 B2





      xes
  5

---

## Page 3

U.S. Patent      Aug. 16, 2011      Sheet 2 of 5        US 7,998,313 B2





     Y
  5

---

## Page 4

U.S. Patent      Aug. 16, 2011      Sheet 3 of 5        US 7,998,313 B2

---

## Page 5

U.S. Patent      Aug. 16, 2011      Sheet 4 of 5        US 7,998,313 B2





    3

---

## Page 6

U.S. Patent      Aug. 16, 2011      Sheet 5 of 5        US 7,998,313 B2



   s

---

## Page 7

US 7,998,313 B2
                                              1.                                         2
     NFLATED FIBERS OF REGENERATED           possesses improved vertical wicking properties compared to
     CELLULOSE FORMED FROM ONC             a similar web of cellulose fibers. The webs are reported useful
   LIQUID/CELLULOSE DOPE AND RELATED          for use informing absorbent products such as diapers and the
              PRODUCTS                                 like.
                                                           U.S. Pat. No. 6,808,557 to Holbrey et al. entitled “Cellu
           CLAIM FOR PRIORITY                      lose Matrix Encapsulation and Method' discloses a regener
                                                              ated cellulose with encapsulated active Substance Such as
  This non-provisional application is based upon U.S. Pro    dyes or magnetic particles within a matrix of regenerated
visional Patent Application Ser. No. 60/873,356, of the same     cellulose prepared from an ionic liquid/cellulose solution.                                                                    10 The regenerated cellulose has a molecular weight similar totitle, filed Dec. 7, 2006. The priority of U.S. Provisional                                                              the original cellulose and is prepared substantially free ofPatent Application Ser. No. 60/873,356 is hereby claimed and                                                                  substituent groups relative to the starting cellulose. The 557the disclosure thereof is incorporated into this application by                                                                patent notes in Col. 13 that engineered forms containing
reference.                                                 impregnated additives with enhanced properties and applica
                                                                   tion can be prepared from ionic liquid Solution. Specific addi            TECHNICAL FIELD                        15                                                                      tives mentioned include bioactive agents, metal complexants,
                                                         water insoluble dyes, nanoparticles, photonic agents, UV
  The present invention  relates  to  inflated structures of     screens, magnetic particles and dispersions of clays. Note
regenerated cellulose, such as fibers or films. Fibers are      also, U.S. patent application Ser. No. 11/087,496; Publication
regenerated from an ionic liquid/cellulose dope having dis    No. US 2005/0288484 to Holbrey et al. entitled “Polymer
persed therein an effervescing agent such that the effervesc     Dissolution and Blend Formation in Ionic Liquids, as well as
ing agent  is encapsulated within a regenerated cellulosic    U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10/394.989; Publication No.
matrix. Upon activation of the effervescing agent, a gas is   US 2004/0038031 to Holbrey et al. entitled “Cellulose Matrix                                                            Encapsulation and Method”.generated in-situ within the matrix to form an inflated structure.                                                     Calcium carbonate has been used as a filler for making high
                                                                  25  strength paper. For example, there is disclosed in U.S. Pat.
            BACKGROUND                      No. 6,235,150 to Middleton et al. a method for attaining high
                                                                     levels of loading of calcium carbonate fillers in the lumens of
                                                                 naturally-derived wood pulp fibers. The pulp is pretreated  Regenerated cellulose is a robust, cost effective material                                                          with a cationic polymer prior to being impregnated with thewhich would likely be more widely used if inflated structures
of regenerated cellulose could be readily produced without  30  filler. Different conditions of pH and temperature are speci                                                                      fied depending on whether the filler is a precipitated calciumthe drawbacks of prior art methods of making such products.
  Regenerated cellulose, sometimes referred to as semi-syn     carbonate  filler or a ground calcium carbonate. Another
thetics or cellulosics, are well-known in the art. Rayon is    method for providing calcium carbonate into a fibrous matrix                                                               involves Supplying a precursor and then treating impregnatedmade by way of the Viscose process which involves reacting                                                                  35  fibers with carbon dioxide. See U.S. patent application Ser.cellulose with a concentrated solution of sodium hydroxide to
form soda cellulose followed by reacting the soda cellulose    No. 10/927,890, Publication No. US 2005/0121157 of Doellewith carbon disulfide to form sodium cellulose Xanthate. The     et al., as well as U.S. patent application Ser. No. 10/543,191,
sodium cellulose Xanthate is dissolved in a dilute solution of     Publication No. US 2006/0113051 of Dolle. Woodpulp fibers
                                                                are not amenable to inflation with an effervescing agent SuchSodium hydroxide to give a viscose solution which is aged
and then extruded through spinerettes into dilute sulfuric 40  as calcium carbonate due to their porosity.
acid, which regenerates the cellulose in the form of continu          It has been found in accordance with the present invention
ous filaments. Cellulose acetate and triacetate products are     that inflated cellulose structures are readily formed from an                                                                  ionic liquid/cellulose dope which has been impregnated withproduced from a dope of cellulose acetate dissolved in                                                        an effervescing agent and regenerated into the desired strucacetone and/or a chlorinated hydrocarbon. Lyocell products
are made from cellulose dissolved in N-methylmorpholine 45  ture.
N-oxide (NMMO). See U.S. Pat. No. 4,246.221 of McCors
ley et al., as well as U.S. Pat. No. 3,508,941 of Johnson.           SUMMARY OF INVENTION
Degradation of the cellulose polymer, reactive chemical spe                                                                   Ionic liquids such as 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium chlocies in the dopes, high temperatures, harsh conditions and                                                                  ride  or  1-allyl-3-methylimidazolium  chloride (AMIm),Solvent disposal are significant processing issues with these  50                                                     which dissolve cellulose under mild conditions, withoutproducts, making  it extremely  difficult to  manufacture                                                                reacting with or degrading the cellulose, makes it possible to
inflated cellulosic products utilizing conventional cellulosic      efficiently encapsulate calcium carbonate or other effervesctechnology.                                                              ing agent in regenerated cellulose. The calcium carbonate, so
   Nevertheless, methods of making inflated textile fibers     entrapped, is used to create carbon dioxide from within fibers
                                                                  55from, for example, Viscose rayon, are known in the art. Vari     that modifies the fiber structure. Such modification can yield
ous methods are reviewed in a 1985 non-wovens symposium     bulking/absorbent fibers for tissue production (or similarly)
paper entitled “The Manufacture, Properties and Uses of     other articles such as porous films and so forth as discussed
Inflated Viscose Rayon Fibers' authored by Woodings et al.     herein. Conventional cellulose dissolution technologies. Such                                                               as Xanthanation or dissolving in N-methylmorpholine oxide,U.S. Pat. No. 3,156,605 to Anderer et al. discloses producing                                                     do not lend themselves to this approach.inflated rayon fibers from Viscose having nitrogen emulsified  60                                                          There is thus provided in accordance with the invention atherein, while GB Patent 244,446 discloses the manufacture                                                    method of making an inflated article of regenerated celluloseof flat ribbon-shaped artificial textile fibers which are more or                                                          such as a fiber or film. The method involves generally: (a)
less hollow from viscose with sodium carbonate or sodium     preparing a cellulosic dope comprising cellulose dissolved in
bicarbonate. Also noted is U.S. Pat. No. 5,124,197 of Bernar    a Suitable ionic liquid or quasi-ionic liquid; (b) dispersing an
                                                                    65din et al. entitled “Inflated Cellulosic Fiber Web Possessing     effervescing agent in the cellulosic dope, the effervescing
Improved Vertical Wicking Properties”. This patent reports     agent and ionic liquid or quasi-ionic liquid being selected
that an absorbent web formed from inflated cellulose fibers     such that they are substantially inert with respect to each

---

## Page 8

US 7,998,313 B2
                   3                                        4
other, and (c) regenerating the cellulosic dope into a shaped      FIGS. 4 and 5 are photomicrographs of the fiber of FIGS. 1
article such as a fiber or a film. The fiber or film comprises a    and 3 during and after treatment with 1.0 NHCl solution
regenerated cellulose matrix having dispersed therein Sub    showing the effects of effervescent of the encapsulated calstantially unreacted effervescing agent encapsulated by the                                                     cium carbonate on the fiber structures, that is, the eruption ofregenerated cellulose matrix. The encapsulated effervescing                                             CO, from the fiber surface. It is seen particularly in FIG.5thatagent is then activated to generate gas in-situ within the regen                                                             a porous flexible fiber, bereft of calcium carbonate particleserated cellulose matrix and create a shaped article with an    was obtained.inflated structure. Any Suitable ionic liquid or quasi-ionic
liquid may be employed. In one preferred aspect of the inven                                                      DETAILED DESCRIPTIONtion, imidazolium salts are used Such as 1-allyl-3-methylimi  10
dazolium chloride or 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride
or 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate. The effervescing      The invention is described in detail below with reference to
agent may be powdered or particulate carbonate salts such as     several embodiments. Such discussion  is for purposes of
calcium carbonate, Sodium carbonate, or sodium bicarbonate.      illustration only.
The effervescing agent may be activated by contacting the  15    Terminology used herein is given its ordinary meaning
shaped article with an aqueous acid, for example, or the     consistent with the exemplary definitions set forth immedi
effervescing agent may be selected Such that it is water     ately below; mg refers to milligrams and m  refers to square
activated.  Suitable acids  for acid activated effervescing     meters, mBar means milliBar (/1000 Bar) and so forth. Unless
agents include mineral acids and organic acids such as citric     otherwise specified, 96 means weight percent.acid, acetic acid, trichloroacetic acid, oxalic acid, malonic                                                            Unless otherwise specified, “basis weight, BWT bwt andacid, maleic acid, lactic acid, glycolic acid, formic acid, ben                                                             so forth refers to the weight of a 3000 square foot ream ofZoic acid, fumaric acid, malic acid or tartaric acid.
   Preferably the effervescing agent is selected and the step of     product. Consistency refers to percent Solids of a nascent
activating the encapsulated effervescing agent is carried out    web, for example, calculated on a bone dry basis. “Air dry
to completion such that the shaped article with an inflated    means including residual moisture, by convention up to about
                                                                  25  10 percent moisture for pulp and up to about 6% for paper. Astructure is substantially bereft of an encapsulated effervesc
ing agent. The cellulosic dope may be regenerated with water     nascent web having 50 percent water and 50 percent bone dry
or regenerated with an aqueous Surfactant or other additive to     pulp has a consistency of 50 percent.
control the size of the regenerated article.                    The term "cellulosic', 'cellulosic sheet” and the like is
   In another aspect of the invention, there is provided a    meant to include any product incorporating papermaking
                                                                30  fiber having cellulose as a major constituent. “Papermakingshaped article of regenerated cellulose having encapsulated
effervescing agent capable of generating a gas in-situ upon     fibers' include Virgin pulps or recycle (secondary) cellulosic
activation which provides an inflated structure to the shaped     fibers or fiber mixes comprising cellulosic fibers. Fibers suit
article. The shaped article is prepared by way of regenerating     able for making the webs of this invention include: nonwood
a cellulosic dope comprising cellulose dissolved in a Suitable      fibers, such as cotton fibers or cotton derivatives, abaca,
                                                                  35  kenaf, Sabai grass, flax, esparto grass, Straw, jute hemp,ionic liquid or quasi-ionic liquid with the effervescing agent
dispersed therein. The encapsulated effervescing agent may     bagasse, milkweed floss fibers, and pineapple leaf fibers; and
be activated to provide an inflated structure having an internal    wood fibers such as those obtained from deciduous and conif
pore volume of from 5% to 50%. In a preferred aspect of the     erous trees, including Softwood fibers, such as northern and
invention the inflated structure has an internal pore volume of     southern softwood Kraft fibers; hardwood fibers, such as
at least 10%.                                                 40  eucalyptus, maple, birch, aspen, or the like. Papermaking
   Fibers of the invention are particularly useful when mixed     fibers used in connection with the invention are typically
with other papermaking fibers in connection with the manu     naturally occurring pulp-derived fibers (as opposed to recon
facture of wet-laid absorbent sheet. The fibers of the invention      stituted fibers such as lyocell or rayon) which are liberated
may be mixed with pulp-derived papermaking fiber Such as    from their source material by any one of a number of pulping
Kraft hardwood fiber or Kraft softwood fiber or recycle fiber.  45  processes familiar to one experienced in the art including
   Typical products have a basis weight of from about 5 lbs/      Sulfate, Sulfite, polysulfide, Soda pulping, etc. The pulp can be
3000 ft ream to about 50 lbs/3000 ft ream. In many cases the    bleached if desired by chemical means including the use of
product will have a basis weight of from about 7.5 lbs/3000 ft      chlorine, chlorine dioxide, oxygen, alkaline peroxide and so
ream to about 35 lbs/3000 ft ream.                                 forth. Naturally occurring pulp-derived fibers are referred to
   Further details and aspects of the present invention are  50 herein simply as “pulp-derived  papermaking fibers. The
described in more detail below.                                products of the present invention may comprise a blend of
                                                              conventional fibers (whether derived from virgin pulp or
       BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF DRAWINGS              recycle sources) and high coarseness lignin-rich tubular
                                                                          fibers, such as bleached chemical thermomechanical pulp
  The  file of this patent contains  at least one drawing  55 (BCTMP). Pulp-derived fibers thus also include high yield
executed in color. Copies of this patent with color drawings(s)     fibers such as BCTMP as well as thermomechanical pulp
will be provided the Patent and Trademark Office upon    (TMP), chemithermomechanical pulp (CTMP) and alkaline
request and payment of the necessary fee.                     peroxide mechanical pulp (APMP). “Furnishes' and like ter
  The invention is described with reference to the drawings,    minology refers to aqueous compositions including paper
wherein:                                                         60 making fibers, optionally wet strength resins, debonders and
  FIG. 1 is a photomicrograph showing a fiber of regenerated     the like for making paper products. The papermaking fibers
cellulose containing calcium carbonate (50x);                   are in many embodiments Kraft fibers, described below.
  FIG. 2 is a photomicrograph of calcium carbonate powder       Kraft softwood fiber is low yield fiber made by the well
(100x):                                           known Kraft (sulfate) pulping process from coniferous mate
  FIG. 3 is a photomicrograph regenerated fiber with encap  65  rial and includes northern and southern softwood Kraft fiber,
sulated calcium carbonate (100x) which shows the encapsu    Douglas fir Kraft fiber and so forth. Kraft softwood fibers
lated calcium carbonate has not been altered; and               generally have a lignin content of less than 5 percent by

---

## Page 9

US 7,998,313 B2
                   5                                           6
weight, a length weighted average fiber length of greater than     impression fabric, and creping the product from the Yankee
2 mm, as well as an arithmetic average fiber length of greater     dryer. A relatively permeable web is typically required, mak
than 0.6 mm.                                                 ing it difficult to employ recycle furnish at levels which may
   Kraft hardwood fiber is made by the Kraft process from    be desired. Transfer to the Yankee typically takes place at web
hardwood sources, i.e., eucalyptus and also has generally a     consistencies of from about 60% to about 70%. See also, U.S.
lignin content of less than 5 percent by weight. Kraft hard      Pat. No. 6,187,137 to Druecke et al. which includes disclo
wood fibers are shorter than softwood fibers, typically having     sure of peeling a web from a Yankee dryer. Uncreped,
a length weighted average fiber length of less than 1 mm and    throughdried products are described in U.S. Pat. No. 5,607,
an arithmetic average length of less than 0.5 mm or less than     551, to Farrington, Jr. et al., the disclosure of which is incor
0.4 mm.                                                           10  porated herein by reference.
   “Cellulosic dope' means a viscous solution of dissolved     Some newer processes including fabric-creping and the
cellulose.                                                 use of creping adhesives are described in the following co
  "Denier' is a measure offiber or filament coarseness and is    pending applications: U.S. application Ser. No. 10/679,862
in units of g/9000 m unless otherwise indicated.                 (Publication No. US 2004/0238135), entitled “Fabric Crepe
  Freezing point depressions of compositions are deter  15  Process for Making Absorbent Sheet' which application,
mined by calculating the melting point by rule of mixtures     incorporated herein by reference, discloses particular paper
and Subtracting the observed melting point of the composi    machine details as well as creping techniques, equipment and
tion.                                                              properties; U.S. application Ser. No. 1 1/108,375(Publication
  The effervescing agent is any suitable, usually particulate,    No. US 2005/0217814), entitled “Fabric Crepe/Draw Process
Substance capable of generating a gas when activated. Acti     for Producing Absorbent Sheet  also incorporated herein by
Vation may be made with water or an aqueous acid, for     reference, provides still further processing and composition
example, depending on the effervescing agent employed.     information; U.S. application Ser. No.  1 1/108,458(Publica
Acid-activated  effervescing  agents  include ammonium,     tion No. US 2005/0241787), entitled “Fabric Crepe and In
alkali metal, and alkaline earth metal carbonates, bicarbon     Fabric Drying Process for Producing Absorbent Sheet” and
ates, sesquicarbonates and the like. Water-activated effer  25 U.S. application Ser. No.  1 1/104,014(Publication No. US
Vescing agents typically include both an acid and a base    2005/0241786),  entitled “Wet-Pressed Tissue and Towel
component which react upon wetting with water to release a     Products With Elevated CD Stretch and Low Tensile Ratios
gas. Suitable effervescing agents are readily selected for use   Made With a High Solids Fabric Crepe Process', both of
in connection with the present invention.                    which are incorporated herein by reference, provide some
  “Fiber’ means an elongated fibrous structure, typically  30  further variation as to selection of components and processing
having an aspect (length/diameter) ratio of 3 or more.           techniques. Another co-pending application, U.S. Ser. No.
  “Film” generally refers to a structure which has a length       1 1/451,111 (Publication No. US 2006/0289134),  entitled
and a width much greater than its thickness.                 “Method of Making Fabric-Creped Sheet for Dispensers',
   “Inflated structure” refers to structure having substantial     incorporated herein by reference, provides information on
                                                                  35  Suitable drying and other manufacturing techniques.internal void volume. Without intending to be bound by
theory or mechanism, inflated structure may be created by        Details with respect to preparation of cellulosic dopes
removal of encapsulated effervescing agent as it decomposes     including cellulose and an ionic liquid and cellulose regen
into gas thus “hollowing  the structure; and/or inflated struc     eration therefrom are found in U.S. patent application Ser.
ture may be created by way of gas generated in-situ expand    No. 10/256,521; Publication No. US 2003/0157351 to Swat
                                                             40ing the surrounding matrix. Both effects are believed to con     loski et al. entitled “Dissolution and Processing of Cellulose
tribute to rendering the article porous in typical embodiments.    Using Ionic Liquids', the disclosure of which is incorporated
   “Internal pore volume' is expressed in percent and is the     herein by reference. There  is described generally in this
volume fraction of void space within a fiber, film, or other     patent a process for dissolving cellulose in an ionic liquid
product including Void space generated by the effervescing    without derivatization and regenerating the cellulose in a
agent, times 100%. Internal pore volume may be measured by 45  range of structural forms.  It is reported that the cellulose
any suitable technique including optical techniques or liquid     solubility and the solution properties can be controlled by the
intrusion under pressure.                                          selection of ionic liquid constituents with Small cations and
  Methods of making paper tissue, towel, and the like are     halide or pseudohalide anions favoring Solution. See also, the
well known, including various features such as Yankee dry     following publications, the disclosure of which is incorpo
ing, throughdrying, fabric creping, dry creping, wet creping  50  rated herein by reference: WO 05/098546; J. Amer. Chem.
and so forth. Conventional wet pressing/dry creping pro     Soc. (2002) 124, article at 4974; Macromolecules (2005),38,
cesses (CWP) have certain advantages over conventional      article at 8272: Macromol. Biosci. (2005), 5, article at 520;
through-air drying processes including: (1) lower energy    and Biomacromolecules (2004), 5, article at 1379.
costs associated with the mechanical removal of water rather      With respect to ionic liquids in general the following docu
than transpiration drying with hot air; and (2) higher produc  55 ments provide further detail: U.S. patent application Ser. No.
tion speeds which are more readily achieved with processes       1 1/406,620, Publication No. US 2006/0241287 to Hecht et al.
which utilize wet pressing to form a web. On the other hand,      entitled “Extracting Biopolymers From a Biomass. Using
through-air drying processing has been widely adopted for     Ionic Liquids”; U.S. patent application Ser. No. 1 1/472,724,
new capital investment, particularly for the production of soft,     Publication No. US 2006/0240727 to Price et  al. entitled
bulky, premium quality tissue and towel products.             60  “Ionic Liquid Based Products and Method of Using The
  Throughdried, creped products and processes (TAD) are    Same'; U.S. patent application Ser. No. 1 1/472,729; Publi
disclosed in the following patents: U.S. Pat. No. 3,994,771 to     cation No. US 2006/0240728 of Price et al. entitled “Ionic
Morgan, Jr. et al.; U.S. Pat. No. 4,102,737 to Morton; and U.S.     Liquid Based Products and Method of Using the Same'; and
Pat. No. 4,529,480 to Trokhan. The processes described in    U.S. patent application Ser. No. 1 1/263.391, Publication No.
these patents comprise, very generally, forming a web on a  65 US 2006/0090271 of Price et al. entitled “Processes For
foraminous Support, thermally pre-drying the web, applying    Modifying Textiles Using Ionic Liquids, the disclosures of
the web to a Yankee dryer with a nip defined, in part, by an    which are incorporated herein by reference.

---

## Page 10

US 7,998,313 B2
                  7
   “Ionic liquid’, refers to a molten composition including an                            -continued
ionic compound that is preferably a stable liquid attempera                                                                        Structure II
tures of less than 100° C. at ambient pressure. Typically, such
liquids have very low vapor pressure at 100° C., less than 75                             Rd YmBar or so and preferably less than 50 m Bar or 25 mBar at  5100° C. Most suitable liquids will have a vapor pressure of        R- s  N-Rless than 10 mBar at 100° C. and often the vapor pressure is so
low it is negligible and is not easily measurable since it is less                              Rfthan  1 mBar at 100° C. The liquids may be a single com                                                                       Structure III
pound, may include simple mixtures of two or more com                         Rpounds, and optionally include reaction or decomposition  10
products formed in-situ. Ionic liquids useful in connection                                                                --
with the present invention may be prepared by combining two          R.-Cs-N-R
or more individual component compounds, which are usually
Solid under ambient conditions, mixing them together and                                                                   Rheating until they melt. The mixture remains a liquid upon  15
cooling, preferably at least to 100° C. Still more preferably,                                                                       Structure IV
the ionic liquids used in connection with the invention have                         R
melting points of less than 75° C., or less than 50° C., andmost preferably are liquid at 25°C. Ionic liquids based on         R- f -R
mixtures of two or more compounds useful in connection                        R
with the present invention typically exhibit significant freez
ing point depressions as compared with the rule of mixtures                                                               In the formula Structure  I, R., represents a hydrocarbonmelting point of the constituent compounds. Preferred ionicliquids exhibit a freezing point depression of at least 25°C.,    group of a carbon number of 4 to 20, and may contain a hetero
preferably 75° C., and more preferably at least 150° C., based    atom, and R, and R  are the same or different, representon the melting points and amounts of the individual compo  25 hydrogen or a hydrocarbon group of a carbon number of 1 tonentS.                                                              16, and may contain a hetero atom, provided that, when a
   Ionic liquids as Such are well known, and may beformed by     nitrogen atom has a double bond, R  is not present.
complexing one or more organic cations from an organic salt,        In the formula Structure II, R  represents a hydrocarbonwith a large metal anion and/oran organic anion from another                                                        group of a carbon number of 2 to 20, and may contain a heterosalt compound. Some organic cations may also form ionic  30liquids with relatively simple anions such as halides, nitrates,     atom, and R. RandR  are the same or different, represent                                                       hydrogen or a hydrocarbon group of a carbon number of 1 tosulfates, or the like. One or both of the anion or cation com
ponents in the ionic liquid may be large and asymmetrical,      16, and may contain a hetero atom.
which promotes lower freezing points presumably because it        In the formula Structure III, R., represents a hydrocarbonis  more difficult                for                   the ions                               to fit                                  into                               a solid                                                  lattice structure.                                                        group of a carbon number of 2 to 20, and may contain a heteroPotentially           useful                  ionic                        liquids                      may                                    also                                 be prepared                                          by com  35bining an organic salt with a hydrogen bond donating agent    atom, and R. R, and R are the same or different, represent a                                                       hydrogen or a hydrocarbon group of a carbon number of 1 toSuch as urea or a carbohydrate (e.g., a saccharide) where the
hydrogen bond donor generally complexes with the anion of     16, and may contain a hetero atom.
the organic salt, thus lowering the melting point of the com        In the formula Structure IV, Z represents a nitrogenatom, a
position.                                                     40  Sulfur atom, or a phosphorus atom, and R. R. R., and Rare   Suitable ionic liquids are disclosed in U.S. patent applica     the same or different, represent a hydrogen atom or a hydro
tion Ser. No.  1 1/375,963 of Amano et al. (Publication No.     carbon group of a carbon number of 1 to 20, and may contain
2006/0207722),  the disclosure of which  is incorporated    a hetero atom, provided that, when Z is a sulfur atom, R  is notherein by reference. These ionic liquids include an onium     present. Specific compounds are enumerated in the  963cation and Suitable anion. Typical cations include those of the                                                                45  application. Suitable cations useful in ionic liquids includefollowing general structures:                                                              the following cations in substituted or unsubstituted form:
                                                 ammonium; guanidium; pyridinium; pyridazinium; pyrimi
                                                                  Structure I    dinium; pyrazinium; imidazolium; pyrazolium; oxazolium;
                                                         uronium; thiouronium;  1,2,3-triazolium;  1,2,4-triazolium;
                                                               thiazolium; piperidinium; pyrrolidinium; quinolinium; and
                                                                50  isoquinolinium.
                                                                  Suitable  commercially  available  ionic   liquids  are
                                                          BasionicTM ionic liquid products available from BASF (Flo
                                                   rham Park, N.J.) and are listed in Table 1 below.
                                                      TABLE  1.
                                                                                      Exemplary Ionic Liquids

                                                                                 Basionic TM
                                                           ILAbbreviation   Grade        Product name                CAS Number

                                                                 STANDARD

                                      EMIMC        ST 80        1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium         6SO39-09-0
                                                                                                     chloride
                                         EMIM         ST35        1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium          145O22-4-5-3
                                   CHSO                         methanesulfonate
                                      BMIMC        ST 70        1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium         79917-90-1
                                                                                                     chloride

---

## Page 11

US 7,998,313 B2
                   9                                        10
                 TABLE 1-continued
                            Exemplary Ionic Liquids

                  Basionic TM
ILAbbreviation   Grade        Product name                CAS Number

BMIM         ST 78        1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium        342789-81-5
CHSO                         methanesulfonate
MTBS         ST 62        Methyl-tri-n-butylammonium          131 O6-24-6
                                 methylsulfate
MMMPZ       ST33         1,2,4-Trimethylpyrazolium
MeOSO                         methylsulfate
EMMIM        ST 67         1-Ethyl-2,3-di-methylimidazolium     516474-08-01
EtOSO                             ethylsulfate
MMMIM       ST 99         1,2,3-Trimethyl-imidazolium         65O86-12-6
MeOSO                         methylsulfate
                              ACIDIC

HMIMC      AC 75       Methylimidazolium chloride          3S487-17-3
HMIM HSO    AC 39       Methylimidazolium hydrogensulfate   681281-87-8
EMIM HSO     AC 25         -Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium         412009-61-1
                                  hydrogensulfate
EMIM AlCl     ACO9         -Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium         80432-05-9
                                  etrachloroaluminate
BMIM        AC 28         -Butyl-3-methylimidazolium        262297-13-2
HSO,                          hydrogensulfate
BMIM AlCl     ACO1         -Butyl-3-methylimidazolium         80432-09-3
                                  etrachloroaluminate
                              BASIC

EMIM Acetat    BC O1         -Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate  143314-17-4
BMIM Acetat    BC O2         -Butyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate  284049-75-8
                        LIQUIDATRT
EMIM        LQ 01         -Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium         342573-75-5
EtOSO,                            ethylsulfate
BMIM        LQ 02         -Butyl-3-methylimidazolium        4O1788-98-S
MeOSO                         methylsulfate
                    LOW WISCOSITY

EMIM SCN     WSO1         -Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium         331717-63-6
                                   hiocyanate
BMIMSCN     VSO2         -Butyl-3-methylimidazolium        344790-87-O
                                   hiocyanate
                       FUNCTIONALIZED

COL Acetate     FS 85        Choline acetate                     14586-35-7
COL           FS 65        Choline salicylate                   2O16-3 6-6
Salicylate
MTEOA        FSO1         Tris-(2-hydroxyethyl)-               29463-06-7
MeOSO                     methylammonium methylsulfate

  Cellulose dopes including ionic liquids having dissolved 45              TABLE 2-continued
therein about 5% by weight underivatized cellulose are com
mercially available from Aldrich. These compositions utilize                 Stable melts of carbohydrates, urea and inorganic salts
alkyl-methylimidazolium acetate as the solvent. It has been      Melting points' Carbohydrate         Urea             Salt
found that choline-based ionic liquids are not particularly
Suitable for dissolving cellulose. Ionic liquids or quasi ionic  50      73o C.     Maltose (50%)     DMU (40%)  NHCl (10%)
liquids which readily dissolve cellulose under mild condi          75o75o C.C.     GlucoseMannose(50%)(30%)       UreaDMU(40%)(70%)   CaCl (10%)
tions are referred to herein as Suitable ionic liquids or quasi          77o C.      Sorbitol (40%)     DMU (60%)
ionic liquids, it being recognized that not all ionic liquids or          77o C.     C-Cyclodextrin (30%)  DMU (70%)  –
quasi ionic liquids will readily dissolve cellulose.                        650 C.      Citric acid (40%)    DMU (60%)
  Other potentially useful ionic liquids and quasi-ionic liq  55   Melting points are at normal pressure in air.
uids are disclosed by Konig et al., Chem. Commun. 2005,    ww percent of the compounds in the mixture,
1170-1172, the disclosure of which is incorporated herein by    DMU = N,N-dimethylurea
reference:                                                          Compositions disclosed also include the following: Fruc
                                                                  60 tose/DMU(70:30); Maltose/DMU/NHC1 (50:40:10): Lac                TABLE 2
                                              tose/DMU/NHC1 (60:30:10): Mannitol/DMU/NHCl (50:
           Stable melts of carbohydrates, urea and inorganic salts              40:10):   Glucosefurea/CaCl(50:40:10):   Sorbitol/DMU/
                                      NHC1    (70:20:10):     Citric   acid/DMU    (40:60);
 Melting points' Carbohydrate         Urea             Salt             C.-Cyclodextrin/DMU (30:70). The ratios given are weight
     650 C.     Fructose (60%)        Urea (40%)                      65  ratios.
     67  C.      Sorbitol (70%)        Urea (20%)   NHCl (10%)       As will be appreciated from the foregoing, the ionic liquids
                                                     employed may potentially be of the class where an organic

---

## Page 12

US 7,998,313 B2
                   11                                         12
salt or urea is mixed with a covalent organic compound. Such    by filtering and re-slurrying in 1 L fresh D.I. water and then
as a sugar or the like. Without intending to be bound by theory,     repeating this process two more times. The resultant fibers are
in many cases it is believed that the organic compound acts as     depicted in FIG. 1 and clearly contain calcium carbonate
a hydrogen bond-complexing agent which interacts with the      particles.
anion of the Salt or other organic compound to depress the       FIG. 2 is a photomicrograph showing the starting calcium
freezing point of the mixture, thereby stabilizing the liquid     carbonate while FIG. 3 shows a regenerated fiber containing
state. Exemplary covalent compounds which potentially may     the same calcium carbonate at the same magnification show
be suitable components for the ionic liquids used in connec     ing that the encapsulated calcium carbonate has not been
tion with the invention include: urea; dimethyl urea; allyl     altered in any way by the process, and is substantially unre
urea; thoiourea; triflouroacetic acid; trichloroacetic acid; cit  10  acted.
ric acid; mandelic acid; Valeric acid; tartaric acid; phenyl                                                                Treating the above fiber with a 1.0N HCl solution effectsacetic acid; m-nitrobenzoic  acid; glutamic acid, m-ami                                                              the desired internal effervescence and subsequent eruption ofnobenzoic acid, acetamide; salicylamide; benzamide: gly                                    CO from the surface of the fiber, as is shown in FIGS. 4 andoxylic acid; benzoic acid; malonic acid; oxalic acid; benzyl                                                                       15  5. FIG. 4 shows a fiber during treatment, while FIG. 5 sows aalcohol; ethanediol; triethanolamine: 2-chloroethanol; Vanil
lin, p-hydroxybenzaldehyde; (alkyl)phenols; glycerol, Sugars     fiber after treatment with HC1.                                                       While not shown here, during effervescence, fracturing ofSuch as fructose, Sorbitol, glucose, or the like; amino com
pounds such as aniline, diaminoethane; 1,2-diaminopropane,     the fiber Surfaces occurred in Some cases, and, in other Sub
and combinations thereof. Combinations of the foregoing     stances, channels appeared within the fibers.
covalent compounds are  likewise  useful  in  the LTILs          It was also demonstrated that size and structure of the
employed. Moreover, it is seen in Table 1 above that stable,     regenerated cellulose can be controlled by the conditions of
low melting liquids may be prepared from Suitable organic     regeneration. Thus, regenerating the cellulose in a 1% aque
compounds without ionic ingredients, for example, Suitable    ous dispersion of Incrosoft CFI-90PG at 80°C. created essen
mixtures of urea and fructose or Suitable mixtures of urea and      tially particle-like cellulose structures. Using dispersion of
citric acid exhibiting the foregoing characteristics in terms of 25 0.1% aqueous Incrosoft-90CFI-PG produced short regener
freezing point depression and vapor pressure. These liquids     ated fibers and fibrous ribbons. Thus, one can make effer
are referred to herein as low melting quasi-ionic liquids.        Vesced regenerated cellulose structures to a range of sizes,
  "Quasi-ionic liquids' refers to molten compositions that    depending on the requirements of the final application, by
preferably form stable liquids at temperatures of less than    changing the method of regeneration.
100° C. at ambient pressure. Typically, such liquids have very  30   The morphology of the regenerated calcium carbonate
low vapor pressure at 100° C., less than 75 mbar or so and     containing cellulose structures can also be altered by first
preferably less than 50 mBar or 25 mBar at 100° C. Most     drying the structures before initiating effervescence, or by
Suitable quasi-ionic liquids will have a vapor pressure of less     drying the already-effervesced structures.
than 10 mBar at 100° C. and often the vapor pressure is so low        Surprisingly, the calcium carbonate, which is insoluble in
it is negligible and is not easily measurable since it is less than  35  water, stayed with the cellulose matrix and became encapsu
1 mBar at 100° C. These liquids are mixtures of two or more     lated by the regenerated cellulose. It appeared that all of the
compounds, such as a urea/fructose mixture which remain    added calcium carbonate was imbedded into the regenerated
liquid upon cooling, preferably at least to 100° C. Still more     cellulose matrix.
preferably, the low-melting quasi-organic liquids used in con      The calcium carbonate? dissolved cellulose dispersion can,
nection with the invention have melting points of less than 75°  40 of course, be spun or film-formed to provide a raft of useful
C. Low-melting quasi-organic liquids useful in connection     structures. For example, calcium carbonate containing spun
with the present invention typically exhibit significant freez     fibers could be cut to a desired size and formed into a paper
ing point depressions as compared with the rule of mixtures    product—alone or with other fibers. Such a paper product
melting point of the constituent compounds. Preferred low    might be useful for detecting acidic systems by effervescing
                                                                45melting quasi-organic liquids ionic liquids exhibit a freezing    upon exposure. One could cause effervescence to occur dur
point depression of at least 25°C., preferably 75° C., and     ing sheet consolidation by spray applying an acid source onto
more preferably at least 150°C., based on the melting points     the wet web on a paper machine to initiate in-situ foam
and amounts of the individual components.                   forming to yield a soft, bulky, and absorbent substrate. Of
   Still further details as to potentially suitable liquids are     course, the spun fibers can be effervesced, to alter their mor
found in the following documents, the disclosures of which 50 phology, and then formed into paper—alone or with other
are incorporated by reference in their entireties: U.S. Pat. No.     fibers—to yield a soft, bulky, and absorbent substrate. Cast
7,053,232, issued May 30, 2006, entitled “Lewis Acid Ionic     films of carbonate containing regenerated cellulose could be
Liquids', to Moulton; U.S. Pat. No. 6,900,313, issued May     useful as barriers or membranes whose permeability could be
31, 2005, entitled “Chiral Ionic Liquids', to Wasserscheid et    changed on demand by adjusting pH. Any number of novelty
al.; and U.S. Pat. No. 6,573,405, issued Jun. 3, 2003, entitled  55  or controlled release items can be conceived, where an object,
“Ionic Liquids', to Abbott et al.                                food, or even medicine can be wrapped in the films of this
                                                               invention and be safely, slowly or rapidly released or modi
              EXAMPLES                              fied on demand by exposing the product to a mild acid solu
                                                                         tion.
 A 0.50 g aliquot of calcium carbonate was dispersed in  60   While the invention has been described in detail, modifi
10.90 g of a 4.76 wt % solution of bleached southern soft     cations within the spirit and scope of the invention will be
wood Kraft pulp in AMIm. (1-allyl-3-methylimidazolium     readily apparent to those of skill in the art. In view of the
chloride), which is a clear stable and viscous fluid at room     foregoing discussion, relevant knowledge in the art and ref
temperature, that had been warmed to 80°C. The resultant     erences including co-pending applications discussed above in
dispersion was poured into 1 L of vigorously stirring deion  65  connection with the Background and Detailed Description,
ized water at room temperature. The cellulose regenerated     the disclosures of which are all incorporated herein by refer
rapidly to form fibers and fibrous ribbons, which were washed     ence, further description is deemed unnecessary.

---

## Page 13

US 7,998,313 B2
                   13                                        14
  What is claimed is:                                              11. The method according to claim 10, wherein the organic
   1. A method of making an inflated article of regenerated     acid is selected from citric acid, acetic acid, trichloroacetic
cellulose comprising:                                              acid, oxalic acid, malonic acid, maleic acid, lactic acid, gly
   (a) preparing a cellulosic dope comprising cellulose dis     colic acid, formic acid, benzoic acid, fumaric acid, malic acid
     Solved in a Suitable ionic liquid or quasi-ionic liquid;      and tartaric acid.                                                                    12. The method according to claim 1, wherein the effer   (b) dispersing an effervescing agent in the cellulosic dope,                                                           Vescing agent is selected and the step of activating the encap     the effervescing agent and ionic liquid or quasi-ionic                                                                 Sulated effervescing agent is carried out to completion, Such     liquid being selected Such that they are substantially                                                                   that the shaped article with an inflated structure is substan
      inert with respect to each other;                            10  tially bereft of encapsulated effervescing agent.
   (c) regenerating the cellulosic dope into a shaped article        13. The method according to claim 1, wherein the cellulo
    comprising a regenerated cellulose matrix having dis      sic dope is regenerated with water.
     persed  therein  Substantially  unreacted  effervescing        14. The method according to claim 1, wherein the cellulo
     agent encapsulated by the regenerated cellulose matrix:      sic dope is regenerated with an aqueous Surfactant composi
    and                                                             15  tion selected to control the size of the regenerated article.
   (d) thereafter, activating the encapsulated effervescing        15. A method of making a wet-laid absorbent sheet com                                                                     prising:     agent to generate a gas in-situ within the regenerated                                                                            (a) preparing inflated regenerated fibers by way of (i) pre     cellulose matrix and create a shaped article with an     inflated structure.                                             paring a cellulosic dope comprising cellulose dissolved
                                                                           in a suitable ionic liquid or quasi-ionic liquid, (ii) dis   2. The method according to claim 1, wherein the shapedarticle with an inflated structure is a fiber with an inflated         persing an effervescing agent in the cellulosic dope, the                                                                    effervescing agent and ionic liquid or quasi-ionic liquid
Structure.                                                      being selected such that they are substantially inert with   3. The method according to claim 1, wherein the shaped                                                                     respect to each other, (iii) regenerating the cellulosicarticle with an inflated structure is a film with an inflated
Structure.                                                        25     dope into a fiber comprising a regenerated cellulose                                                                matrix having disposed therein Substantially unreacted   4. The method according to claim 1, wherein the cellulose                                                                    effervescing agent encapsulated by the regenerated celdope comprises an ionic liquid which is an imidazolium salt.                                                                      lulose matrix, and (iv) thereafter, activating the encap   5. The method according to claim 4, wherein the imidazo                                                                      Sulated effervescing agent to generate a gas in-situlium salt is selected from: 1-allyl-3-methylimidazolium chlo                                                                  within the regenerated cellulose matrix and create a fiberride: 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride; and 1-ethyl-3-  30                                                               with an inflated structure;methylimidazolium acetate.                                                                       (b) preparing an aqueous furnish incorporating the inflated   6. The method according to claim 1, wherein the effervesc                                                                  regenerated cellulose fibers made by step (a) as well asing agent comprises a powdered carbonate salt.                                                                  pulp-derived papermaking fibers;   7. The method according to claim 6, wherein the carbonate                                                                            (c) depositing the aqueous furnish on aforaminous Supportsalt is calcium carbonate, Sodium carbonate or Sodium bicar  35                                                                        to form a nascent web and at least partially dewateringbonate.                                                                   the nascent web; and   8. The method according to claim 1, wherein the effervesc                                                                     (d) drying the web to provide absorbent sheet.ing agent is activated by contacting the shaped article with anacid.                                                               16. The method according to claim 15, wherein the aque
                                                             40 ous furnish comprises a pulp derived fiber selected from Kraft   9. The method according to claim 8, wherein the acid is amineral acid.                                         hardwood fiber, Kraft softwood fiber, recycle fiber and mix                                                                   tures thereof.   10. The method according to claim 8, wherein the acid is an
organic acid.